Names:	Courtney Gardner -- cng3@rice.edu
		Aaron Shaw -- aws6@rice.edu

COMP 321 Project 5: Malloc Dynamic Memory Allocator
Date: 3/31/19 (One Slip Day Used)

DESCRIPTION

We have implemented a dynamic memory allocator that allows us to manage
memory needed to run C programs in real time. A user can make calls to the
functions implemented in our mm.c program throughout their code, allowing
for additional virtual memory to be set aside for their data structures at
run time. When our allocator is initialized, it begins by setting aside a 
small area of memory on the system, thereby initializing the memory heap. 
Then, as the user creates various data structures in their program, they 
will either make calls to use more memory, resize the amount of memory that 
an object uses, or stop using a given bit of memory. Whenever a call to one
of these functions is made, the user will receive a pointer to the location
of that object in the memory heap, allowing them to point to that object
as they need to. Thus, as the user makes various calls to the mm_malloc, 
mm_realloc, and mm_free functions that we've implemented, they will be able 
to ensure that they have the appropriate amount of memory to store and keep 
track of their data regardless of how much memory they require at compile 
time.


DESIGN

We chose to implement our allocator as an explicit free list. Implementing our
allocator in this manner allowed us to locate an appropriately sized block of
available memory much faster than we would have been able to by using an
implicit implementation. We know this because the explicit list only has to
look through free blocks and find one that is large enough whereas the implicit
implementation has to look through every block in memory, determine if it is
free, and determine if it is large enough. 

By utilizing an explicit free list, we needed to make sure that we called our
coalesce method every time that we called our mm_free function. Since our
search consisted of looking through all free blocks, we wanted to ensure that
we kept our list of free blocks updated with the correct sizes so that our 
search is looked through all of the free blocks as opposed to just the 
blocks that were marked free before we invoked the mm_free call. 

In terms of how we designed our blocks of memory, we chose to create blocks
with a header and an identical footer. The reasoning behind utilizing both
a header and a footer was that doing so would allow us to more easily split
up blocks when we wanted to allocate a certain amount of memory to a free
block that was larger than necessary. Our header and footer stored information
about the size of the block of memory as well as whether or not that block
was allocated. Additionally, we chose to store pointers to the previous free
block and the next free block of memory, bring us to one of the more important
design choices that we made.

Essentially, we implemented our list of free blocks as a circular doubly-
linked list. In order to implement this doubly-linked list, we
created a struct, free_blk, that kept track of the previous free block and
of the next free block, and each of our blocks of memory were essentially
pointers to these structs which held pointers to the next and previous 
blocks. Every time we invoked a method that somehow added to or reorganized 
our free blocks, we utilized a helper function that we created which 
essentially added a free block to our linked list by updating the pointers
of the existing head of the list. Similarly, if we allocated memory, we 
removed a given block from the free list by updating its pointers with 
another helper method.

Keeping track of our free blocks with a doubly-linked list was a design
choice that had a very large impact on our find_fit function. We chose to
look for the first free block that was large enough to hold the information
that needed to be stored as opposed to looking for the most appropriately
sized free block of memory. While looking for the closet sized free block
would help with utilization and limit the amount of fragmentation in our
heap, we chose to go with the first match we found because it provided a
much faster implementation overall. As such, in order to find the first
appropriately sized block, our doubly-linked list allowed us to start at the
head of our free list and then iterate through all pointers to the next free
blocks until an appropriately sized block had been located. Notably, since
we used a circular doubly-linked list, we were able to break free of this
for-loop if our next block was the same as our current block because it
indicated that we had iterated through all of our free blocks and were 
unable to find any existing blocks of appropriate size.



TESTING STRATEGY

For this project, we are evaluated on our performance of the provided trace
 files. No other trace files are used in calculating our score; thus, our
 testing strategy revolved around this notion.

We split testing into two phases. 
Phase 1: testing with checkheap

While we were writing code, we tested with the checkheap to ensure our 
explicit free list was following the the required guidelines. In checkheap we
 answered the following questions:
 	1.Is every block in the free list marked as free?
	2.Are there any contiguous free blocks that escaped coalescing?
	3.Is every free block actually free?
	4.Is every free block actually in the free list?
	5.Are pointers to blocks in the free list valid?
	6.Does removing a free block actually remove it from the free list?

Each one of these questions had a dedicated section of code within checkheap 
to test for its cases. These code sections were either helper functions or
 code snippet depending on how many lines were required to achieve the 
functionality.

These tests are sufficient to ensure that our mm.c program works correctly
 because we check every case involving free lists and moving blocks in/out of
 the free list.

Questions 1 examines adding blocks to the free list (add_free() was the name
 of our function dedicated to adding a free block to the free block list). It
 checks to ensure the new free block is added in the proper location of our 
free list.

Question 2 examines our ability to ensure all free blocks of memory are stored
 in the free list. It ensures that the combined functionality of add_free(),
 coalesce(), and free() is correct.

Question 3 examines whether we properly freed a block of memory stored in the
 free list. This ensures that we properly free memory.

Question 4 examines our ability to coalesce. It ensures that no extra free 
blocks exist and that the functionality of our coalesce and add to free list 
are correct. 

Question 5 examines whether the structure we created to point to free memory 
blocks is correct. It ensures that all memory blocks are valid, allowing us to
 know that our free memory block pointers are correctly made, freed, and added.

Question 6 examines our ability to remove elements from the free list. This 
also ensures that we properly reallocate if a reallocation of memory is 
requested.

Every time a major change in our code was made, we called checkheap to ensure
 that we preserved the functionality of our previous code. If the result from 
one of these checks was incorrect, we printed a standard error message 
informing us of which check failed.

Phase 2: testing the trace files
The second half of our testing occurred once we had successfully completed the
 project. The goal of this testing was to ensure the efficiency of our code 
and to optimize further. We ran all of the trace files individually to examine
 our throughout and utiliy. When we discovered a file with significantly 
different scores  from other traces (ie throughput of 10+ lower than all other
 cases), then we would examine that trace more closely. In a few cases this 
lead to hard coding specific block allocation sizes. This ensured that all 
traces were sufficiently fast—our overall score when testing was 94/100, with
 a 60/60 on throughput.

After we ensured all traces files were running smoothly, we ran every single 
combination of trace file orderings. This ensures that regardless of the order
 of testing, program will always give the same result.
